Whey is used to produce whey cheeses such as ricotta, Norwegian brunost, and whey butter and many other products for human consumption. The fat content of whey is low; 1,000 pounds of whey are required to make a few pounds of whey butter.[10] It is also an additive in many processed foods, including breads, crackers, and commercial pastry, and in animal feed. Whey proteins consist primarily of α-lactalbumin and β-lactoglobulin. Sweet whey contains glycomacropeptide (GMP). It is also an abundant source of lactose which can further be used for the synthesis of lactose-based bioactive molecules.[11]

Dairy whey remaining from home-made cheesemaking has many uses. It is a dough conditioner[12] and can be substituted for skimmed milk in most baked good recipes that require milk (bread, pancakes, muffins, etc.).[13][14]

Throughout history, whey was a popular drink in inns and coffee houses. When Joseph Priestley was at college at Daventry Academy, 1752–1755, he records that, on the morning of Wednesday, 22 May 1754, he "went with a large company to drink whey."[15] This was probably "sack whey" or "wine whey".[clarification needed]

Whey is also one of the main ingredients of Rivella, a carbonated drink in Switzerland.

Another use of whey is to make "cream of tartar whey": "Put a pint of blue milk [skim milk] over the fire, when it begins to boil, put in two tea spoonfuls of cream of tartar, then take it off the fire, and let it stand till the curd settles to the bottom of the pan, then put it into a basin to cool, and drink it milk warm." This is known as heat-acid coagulation.[16]

In areas where cheese is made, excess whey byproduct is sometimes sprayed over hay fields as a fertilizer.[17]

Historically whey, being a byproduct of cheese making, was considered a waste product and was pumped into rivers and streams in the U.S. Since the whey contained protein, this practice led to the growth of large concentrations of algae. These were deemed to be a hazard to the ecosystem because they prevented sunlight and oxygen from reaching the water. The government eventually prohibited this practice which led to a disposal problem for producers of other dairy products. Their first solution was to use it as a cheap filler in the production of ice cream. Whey eventually found its way into innumerable other products as a filler and ultimately into a number of health food products where it remains a popular supplement.